Customer Reviews Sentiment Analysis: A
hybrid technique of Lexicon and Machine
Learning based Classification model (SVM,
NB, Logistic Regression)
MSc Research Project
Data Analytics

Komal Vijay Bhalerao
Student ID: 20135386
School of Computing
National College of Ireland

Supervisor: Christian Horn

National College of Ireland
Project Submission Sheet
School of Computing
Student Name:
Student ID:
Programme:
Year:
Module:
Supervisor:
Submission Due Date:
Project Title:

Word Count:
Page Count:

Komal Vijay Bhalerao
20135386
MSc Data Analytics
2020
MSc Research Project
Christian Horn
16/08/2021
Customer Reviews Sentiment Analysis: A hybrid technique
of Lexicon and Machine Learning based Classification model
(SVM, NB, Logistic Regression)
7466
23

I hereby certify that the information contained in this (my submission) is information
pertaining to research I conducted for this project. All information other than my own
contribution will be fully referenced and listed in the relevant bibliography section at the
rear of the project.
ALL internet material must be referenced in the bibliography section. Students are
required to use the Referencing Standard specified in the report template. To use other
author’s written or electronic work is illegal (plagiarism) and may result in disciplinary
action.
Signature:

Komal Vijay Bhalerao

Date:

16th August 2021

PLEASE READ THE FOLLOWING INSTRUCTIONS AND CHECKLIST:
Attach a completed copy of this sheet to each project (including multiple copies).
Attach a Moodle submission receipt of the online project submission, to
each project (including multiple copies).
You must ensure that you retain a HARD COPY of the project, both for
your own reference and in case a project is lost or mislaid. It is not sufficient to keep
a copy on computer.





Assignments that are submitted to the Programme Coordinator office must be placed
into the assignment box located outside the office.
Office Use Only
Signature:
Date:
Penalty Applied (if applicable):

Customer Reviews Sentiment Analysis: A hybrid
technique of Lexicon and Machine Learning based
Classification model (SVM, MNB, LogReg)
Komal Vijay Bhalerao
x20135386
Abstract
The majority of items are available online in our digital age. E-commerce platforms are evolving in order to put products within the reach of online users in
order to deliver the highest level of customer pleasure and convenience of use.
People nowadays tend to rely on feedback before ordering any goods online, therefore reading hundreds of evaluations takes up a lot of time for customers. Making
decisions on enhancing quality of the product and acquiring insights, companies
and organizations can obtain lot of data from customer sentiment analysis. A lot of
research has previously been implemented on the classification of Sentiment Analysis based on many different aspects and techniques, however, not a lot of research
has been done with a combination of Lexicon based and Machine Learning classification model. The process of Sentiment analysis can be tedious since the data
available is textual format and it is the most unstructured type of data available.
In this research, to enable efficient and outstanding outcome for classification, text
pre-processing is carried out and two types of feature extractors are used. In order
to fulfil this task, three machine learning models were implemented. The outcome
generated by these models were evaluated using different evaluation matrices and
the results were compared. SVM provided the best accuracy for classification i.e.
91% using TF-IDF vector.
Keywords- NLP, Sentiment Analysis, Machine Learning, TF-IDF, CountVectorizer, SVM, Naive Bayes, Logistic Regression

1

Introduction

The recognition and classification of Human Sentiment for understanding and monitoring
the emotion or sentiment behind a product in order to recommend similar product based
on the previous reviews of customers is an imperative task. Recent decade has witnessed
the change of manual door to door shopping to the digitization of shopping online and
thus the Internet is now the go-to place for customer to buy things online according to
their convenience.

1.1

Background and Motivation

The era of customer service has arrived. When any organization meets the needs of it’s
customers providing the best service, it is said to be growing. Therefore, it is important
1

for an organization to get feedback on each product for improving product manufacturing
or correcting any anticipated faults. Reviews assist customer’s making better decisions of
whether to invest buying a product online or not. The motivation behind this research is
to find whether a combination of lexicon and machine learning based classification models
like SVM, Naive Bayes, Logistic Regression the addition of word vector based feature
extraction techniques like Count Vector and TF-IDF vector achieve better outcome in
terms of accuracy for predicting the polarity of sentiments for products on reviews posted
by customers.
One of Amazon’s most well-known offerings is Amazon Customer Reviews (also known
as Product Reviews). Millions of Amazon customers have posted over a hundred million
comments to express their thoughts and describe their experiences with products on the
Amazon.com website in the nearly two decades since the first review in 1995. This makes
Amazon User Reviews a valuable resource for academic scholars working in fields such as
Information Retrieval (IR), Natural Language Processing (NLP) and Machine Learning
(ML). Sentiment Analysis in other terms, Opinion Mining is a assessable representation
of opinions and emotions behind a text. Positive, negative and neutral are the three
possible sentiments classification found behind a text. Sentiment Analysis has gained
immense popularity in recent years. In Machine Learning, it is termed as one of the
types of classification approach of text that is based on Sentimental Orientation (SO) of
opinions contained in the form of text (Jha et al.; 2021).
Natural Language Processing (NLP), one of the domains of Machine Learning is the
capability of machines of reading, analyzing and extracting the simplification of human
language. Due to the exponential advancements in computational power and data access
by authorizing in deriving insightful meaning, NLP is advancing immensely in the domains like healthcare, finance, media and human resources. In other words, NLP allows
the handling of human emotions carried out in the form of text or speech (May et al.;
2020). There are many techniques used in NLP such as, Text summarization, Aspect
Mining, Topic Modeling and Sentiment Analysis. This research focuses on Sentiment
Analysis . Handful amount of research has been implemented in the past on classification of sentiments using several methods and techniques. Sentiment analysis divides the
subjective effects of the user’s feelings into polarities. In general, there are two types of
techniques to dealing with this issue.
• Approaches based on Machine Learning, One of the most well-known techniques is this one. Researchers are becoming interested in this technology because
it is more versatile and precise. There are two types of machine learning methods
for sentiment classification: supervised and unsupervised. Classification methods
are usually classified as either supervised or unsupervised. Supervised machine
learning methods such as Decision trees, Naive Bayes, and others are used for classification, while unsupervised learning techniques such as Neural networks are used
for clustering.
• Lexicon-based approach, The simplest method for conducting sentiment analysis is to use lexicon-based techniques. This method takes use of a dictionary
that contains words that have already been pre-tagged. To perform sentiment analysis, WordNet and SentiwordNet are publicly available dictionaries (Khanvilkar
and Vora; 2019).
However, not a lot of work has been done in the past of exploring a combination of
Machine-Learning and lexicon based models with different feature extraction techniques
2

suitable for the data available and classifying the sentiment in terms of thorough preprocessing against the ranking/ratings of the products. Classifiers like Support Vector
Machine (SVM) and Naive Bayes have proved to be very effective for a classification
problem (Shivaprasad and Shetty; 2017). Alongside extraction of features, the outcome
provided by several machine learning model is remarkable (Gamal et al.; 2019). However,
the scope of the data used is large and the experiments are conducted on variety of
datasets. Therefore, classification of Sentiment by extracting feature on a subset from
the entire set has not been explored vastly and from the smaller subset, is the scope on
which the project is revolved around. This research uses a subset of products for a decent
amount of data for accomplishing the task of Sentiment Analysis.

1.2

Project Requirements Specification

This research project aims to classify reviews by conducting Sentiment Analysis of Beauty
products available on Amazon.com. This will help customer in a way providing the
product with most positive ratings and negative ratings which will help the customer
with the decision-making process.
1.2.1

Research Question

The main focus is on comparing and evaluating the production/performance of different Machine Learning Classification models for classifying the customer uploaded feedback and the sentiments or emotions expressed on various beauty products available on
Amazon.
RQ: ”How well can Lexicon and Machine Learning based predictive classification models
(SVM, Naive Bayes and Logistic Regression) be used on customer reviews for Sentiment
Analysis?
1.2.2

Research Objective and Contributions

The research project includes pre-processing the data, implementation of different feature extraction techniques, implementation of three Machine Learning Classification algorithms such as SVM, Naive Bayes and Logistic Regression. Further, the results produced by these models are evaluated using different evaluation techniques and compared
in terms of performance.
The Research Objectives are:
1. Objective 1: Critically review the literature on NLP, sentiment analysis using ML
and other techniques.
2. Objective 2: Download data available online for research and pre-process data in
order for it to be ready for feature extraction and classification.
3. Objective 3: Implement and Evaluate classification models (SVM, Naive Bayes,
Logistic Regression).
4. Objective 4: Compare results of the classification models.
Contributions: The project contribution includes implementation of a combination of
a hybrid technique (lexicon and machine learning) based classification models with the
addition of using two feature extractors. A subset of Amazon product reviews was used.
3

This will help customer in a way providing the product with most positive ratings and
negative ratings which will help the customer with the decision-making process .
The structure of the technical report at hand is as follows. Section 2 highlight and
review the most relevant literature review as per the objective of this project. Section
3 explain in details, the methodologies used, the design specification and architecture
along with the data pre-processing steps followed. The implementation of the algorithms
used, the evaluation and results is described in Section 4. Lastly, in section 5 and 6 the
discussion of results and future work is covered, respectively.

2

Related Work

2.1

Introduction

The literature review is an important aspect of the planned research paper since it gives
a thorough examination of the work done in the field. It provides an overview of the
research topic and the hypothesis to be tested. Numerous Sentiment Analysis studies
have been conducted in the past.This review compares several algorithmic models to
examine the impact of Machine Learning approaches.The complete review of relevant
papers is divided into different categories reviewed below.

2.2

Application of Natural Language Processing in Sentiment
Analysis

Objective parameters and subjective parameters are the two types of parameters that
are considered for mining the customer reviews while using opinion mining, suggested
in the research conducted by (Rajeev and Rekha; 2015). Age and count of reviews,
star ratings are contained in the objective parameter. Whereas, sentiment or emotion of
the customers regarding a product particularly is contained in the subjective parameter.
Implementation of objective parameters is done using mathematical calculations on the
other hand, different techniques of Natural Language Processing (NLP) are used for
implementing subjective parameters. Based on the adjectives used, these NLP techniques
derive the sentiment or opinion conveyed by the customer in terms of reviews to be either
positive or negative. The research solely focuses on one category of product i.e Mobile
phone from flipkart. Step-wise approach methodology is implemented in this research
such as Review extraction, review process, feature extraction of reviews, product score
classification and comparing products. Natural Language Toolkit (nltk) and POS tagging
is used in order to process the reviews.
According to research conducted by (Shivaprasad and Shetty; 2017) the Sentiment
Analysis classification is divided into three levels also suggested by (Solangi et al.; 2018)
as a discovery in the research i.e. Document level, sentence level and aspect level. In this
research, the framework of Sentiment Analysis is discussed on a basic level and the process
is followed including steps such as Data preparation, Review Analysis and classification
of sentences, (Rajeev and Rekha; 2015) also followed the same steps in their research
conducted. Further, the polarity of the sentiment is classified into three approaches.
These three approaches are namely, Binary approach, Multi-level approach and Fuzzy
approach or contextual approach, as evident in the research. In Binary approach, as
the name suggests the sentiments are classified into two categories i.e. positive and
4

negative. Star-based inference approach, other name for Multi-class approach is where
the star-based ratings system is carried out. The star rating system is categorized into
lowest(1 star) to highest (5 stars).The three measures of polarity i.e positive, negative
and neutral is focused in the third approach i.e. Fuzzy approach or contextual approach.
Additional, in continuation the research discussed two different approaches/ methods used
for Sentiment Analysis is discussed briefly namely, lexicon-based approach and machine
learning approach. In this research, the Binary approach is followed along with the
combination of both approaches for sentiment analysis is implemented.
Natural Language Processing (NLP) and tool-kits that are proved to be extremely
useful in dealing with tokenization and word segmentation is reviewed in the research
conducted by (Solangi et al.; 2018). Text processing techniques such as Segmentation,
tokenization, POS Tagging and Conditional Random Fields(CRFs) are briefly described
in this research. Many powerful tools in NLP for tokenization and segmentation such as
LTP tool, Parser:C++, Gensim python etc are also described explicitly. The research
continued with the process of sentiment analysis by dividing the process in three different
levels. These three levels included Document-level, sentence-level and fine-grained level.
In the Document level i.e the first level, the tone conveyed in a sentence is determined
as positive, negative or neutral. Moving forward in the second level i.e. the sentence
level, the evaluated outcome in the previous step are transpired to be negative, positive
or neutral. In conclusion, the research suggested use of different applicable techniques
for retrieving correct information or future modification of NLP.

2.3

Application of Sentiment Analysis on customer reviews using Machine Learning

Three different classification models are employed in this study by (Hermansyah and
Sarno; 2020) such as Naive Bayes, TextBolb, and KNN (K-Nearest Neighbors). The
study’s conclusion includes a comparison of the effectiveness of the three algorithms
utilized. The KNN algorithm generated the highest performance, with a total accuracy
of 75%, followed by the Naive Bayes algorithm, which scored 70%, and TextBolb, which
scored the lowest of all three i.e. 55%. The Naive Bayes algorithm will be used in this
study, and the level of accuracy is attempted to increase.
In addition to the NLP approaches mentioned in the preceding section, (Shivaprasad
and Shetty; 2017) employed Machine Learning methods like as Naive Bayes, Maximum
Entropy, and Support Vector Machine (SVM). When it comes to evaluating sentiment,
classifiers are essential. In comparison to SVM, the Naive Bayes method showed to be
more efficient and scalable when it came to classifying text. Many scholars, on the other
alternative, utilize SVM algorithms as complex classifiers, and the performed experiment
shown that SVM achieves higher performance in terms of accuracy. Maximum Entropy,
on the other hand, is suitable for probability distribution. To summarize, when compared
to other methods, SVM showed to be the most accurate.
According to (Jabbar et al.; 2019), the POST (Parts Of Speech) approach may categorize phrases using adverbs, adjectives, adverbs, and verbs. For evaluations like ”not
good” and ”good,” the Negation Phase Identification cation algorithm was used to gain
a better understanding of the sentiment behind the feedback. The reviews are gathered
further in the study from Amazon.com, namely on products in the Cosmetics and Musical
Instruments sections. The SVM (Support Vector Machine) method is used in conjunction
5

with a mobile app to calculate the total percentage of positive and negative evaluations
for a product. From the results obtained so far in the field, Support Vector Machine
(SVM) is among the successful algorithms employed for Sentiment Analysis. In order to
attain better outcomes, SVM is employed in this study.
Three distinct methods, such as Naive Bayes, SentiWordNet & Logistic Regression,
were employed in the study by (Jabbar et al.; 2019) to detect the sentiment underlying
reviews by categorizing them as positive or negative. The proposed process is broken
down into multiple steps, such as Text Extraction, which involves extracting text from
the URL of the specified website after providing the credentials. Amazon.com is used to
gather reviews in this scenario. In the next step, a list of items is displayed, from which
the user can select a product to obtain reviews, as well as the classification of the product
as positive or negative. The study concluded that, of the three algorithms tested, the
Naive Bayes classification algorithm performed well.
(Gamal et al.; 2019) examined several Machine Learning Models for sentiment classification and review mining utilizing a variety of data-sets including IMDB, Amazon,
Twitter, and Cornell. Extraction Of features & Machine Learning Classification are the
two steps in the process. The TF-IDF (Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency)
and N-Gram Algorithms are the primary feature extraction methods utilized. Naive
Bayes, Multinomial Naive Bayes(MNB), Bernoulli Naive Bayes(BNB), Passive Aggressive(PA), SGD, AdaBoost, Ridge Regression and Logistic Regression are among the ML
algorithms used in this study. K-fold Cross Validation was utilized as the evaluation technique. Finally, PA and Ridge Regression, when combined with various feature extraction
techniques, outperformed with accuracy ranging from 87 percent to 99.96 percent.
Machine Learning-based sentiment analysis is a well-studied topic. (Singh and Sarraf;
2020) did a study that used both customer and seller comments and used Random Forest
Classification for Sentiment Analysis to classify the reviews. BeautifulSoup, a Python
library, is used to get live data from Flipkart.com. The website’s live information is
extracted using URLs. The BOW (Bag Of Words) method is used to generate output
that is either 0 or 1 based on whether the feedback is positive or negative. A User
Interface (Application) is designed to compare the overall percentage of negative and
positive evaluations for a given product. This implementation can be done on a variety
of websites, including EBay, Amazon and many more E-commerce websites.

2.4

Application of Deep Learning in Sentiment Analysis

Natural Language Processing has been frequently used in fields such as text classification,
machine translation, speech recognition, and text classification, in addition to Sentiment
Analysis. In the domain of sentiment analysis, deep learning techniques are emerging
to anticipate sentiment reviews and opinions. In the suggested domain, there is a lot
of research going on. (Prabha and Srikanth; 2019) conducted a survey that discusses
brie facts about deep learning algorithms at both the target/aspect and sentence level.
The disadvantages of doing sentiment analysis utilizing Machine Learning methods are
fully explored. The BoW method has a major flaw because it loses the sequence of the
words and excludes semantic information, resulting in the sentence’s core being lost. The
N-gram method, on the other hand, solves the disadvantage of BoW but struggles from
data fineness. The survey comes to a close with a review of Deep Learning approaches
that may be used with Sentiment Analysis.

6

(Seetharamulu et al.; 2020) designed and built a Deep Learning for Emotion Recognition method. The effectiveness of deep learning is shown to be largely dependent on the
availability of large-scale training data in this study. The goal of this study is to create
a Deep Learning-based framework for categorizing customer evaluations as positive or
negative. This framework makes use of the many product ratings available to categorize
the emotion of the review. A prototype application is created to illustrate the proof of
concept. When comparing WDE to baseline approaches such as CNN, it is clear that
WDE outperforms and produces beneficial outcomes. The accuracy of the findings is
assessed.
Deep learning is a strong approach for sentiment analysis that is employed in machine
learning. Multiple levels of data characteristics are used to get the prediction results.
Deep learning has gained a lot of traction in the field of sentiment analysis, due to its
success in other fields (Zhang et al.; 2018).According to (Gupta et al.; 2020) latest research in this area, maximum scalability may be obtained by adopting Aspect-Based sentiment analysis. The different polarity aspects of a sentence can be found using ABSA
(Aspect-Based Sentiment Analysis). The suggested CNN (Convolutional Neural Network) technique was applied in this study, with generic and domain-specific embeddings
produced using Word2Vec for training purposes. The polarity of a review is determined
using the Textbolb technique. Later, Precision, Recall, Accuracy, and F-measure are used
to analyze the Deep Neutral Network architecture. The model has an overall accuracy of
89%.
However, (Yang and Yang; 2020) split Aspect-Based Sentiment Analysis (ABSA) into
two sub-categories: Aspect-term sentiment analysis (ATSA) and Aspect-category sentiment analysis (ACSA).Aspect-term sentiment analysis (ATSA) and Aspect-category
sentiment analysis (ACSA) are two types of sentiment analysis (ACSA). Models for sentiment analysis such as RNN (Recurrent Neural Network) and LSTM (Long Short-Term
Memory) have complicated structures and take more training time, thus in this study,
a novel model based on gating mechanism with the combination of Self-attention mechanism and CNN is introduced. Self-attention is utilized in the first stage to extract the
structural characteristic of information. Later, CNN takes the original sentence’s characteristics and combines them with the result. To generate a final sentiment feature, the
initial sentence is merged with an aspect-term or an aspect category from the previous
phase. Finally, the experiment proved to be effective. The accuracy of the self-attention
gated CNN model for ACSA was 82% and 80 % for 10 experiments. The accuracy of the
ATSA model was 72 % and 63 %, respectively.

2.5

Hybrid approach (Lexicon-based and Machine Learning)
based Sentiment Analysis

To improve accuracy, (Haque et al.; 2018) used two distinct feature extractors: BoW and
TF-IDF & chi-square. The experiment is carried out on an unlabeled supervised sample.
Both an active and a manual technique are used to label the dataset. To get positive
outcomes, several simulation approaches such as cross validation and train-test ration are
used.SVM (Support Vector Machine) produced the best findings of all the classification
methods used. In most situations, however, a 10 fold increase in accuracy gave superior
outcomes. The total accuracy in this research was 90%, and the assessment procedures
Precision, Recall, and F1 were used to obtain 90% results.
Machine Learning methods and Lexicon-Based methodologies are used as a hybrid
7

approach for Sentiment Analysis. Because reviews are often categorized as positive or
negative, a hybrid model was used to solve the neutral class (Rajeswari et al.; 2020).
Naive Bayes, Logistic Regression, Support Vector Machine and Decision Tree are some
of the Machine Learning techniques used. The data-set used in the proposed research
work include product, twitter, and movie reviews. SentiWordNet is recommended for
classifying neutral reviews, in addition to positive and negative evaluations. The features
are retrieved after pre-processing texts utilizing BoW (BagOfWords), n-gram and TFIDF. Metrics like as AUC, recall, precision, f-measure, and accuracy are used in the
assessment. In conclusion, TF-IDF showed to be more accurate than others for feature
extraction, and furthermore Logistic Regression provided higher accuracy than the other
classifiers employed in the research.
When compared to lexicon-based or Machine Learning approaches, the use of a hybrid
method improves sentiment analysis classification results. A hybrid method, which combines Machine Learning and Lexicon-based approaches to produce optimal outcomes, is
used to achieve the best results. Different hybrid methods and approaches are described
by (Ahmad et al.; 2017). pSenti, SAIL, NILC USP, and Achemy API are among the tools
available. It has been observed that Lexicon-based models improve performance when
there are obvious borders between emotions, but Machine Learning techniques perform
better when no distinct limits are specified. Because of its simplicity of application in
opinion mining or sentiment classification, the hybrid model is significant and successful.

2.6

Application of Word Vectors technique in Sentiment Analysis

Word representation is considered a critical component in many Natural Language Processing systems. Vector-based models outperform other models in this assessment. Vectorbased models express consistent similitude of words as angle or length between word vectors in a wide expanse (Maas et al.; 2011). When unsupervised vector-based algorithms
are combined, it creates useful lexicons, but it lacks the ability to comprehend sentiment
information, which is fundamental to many NLP jobs and word meanings. The model
provided used a combination of supervised and unsupervised methods. A dictionary
of 5000 frequently used phrases is constructed in the form of tokens for movie reviews
from IMDB to understand word representation. Later in the evaluation process, the
Document Polarity classifier is used to anticipate whether the reviews will be positive
or negative.The goal of the study was to limit the representation of words. The word
representations might capture both semantics and sentiment if they were included to an
unsupervised model.
Glove, an unsupervised technique, has been shown to be effective in interpreting
the meaning and emotions behind a sentence or review using vector representation of
words.To solve the lack of consistency and effectiveness, (Sharma et al.; 2017) employed
a mix of the above skip gram and Continuous Bag of Words and developed the GloVe
approach. The dot product of a vector and other vectors is used to measure the correlation between two words. Later, it is determined that the greatest dot product is
indistinguishable.
The goal of (Fan et al.; 2016)paper is to test the effects of word vector representations for Sentiment Classification. The tasks were further divided into three sub-tasks
in this study: extracting sentiment words, detecting sentiment words polarities, and text
sentiment predictions. Using diverse text data on vector representations, the efficiency
8

of domain-dependent vectors is assessed. Accuracy, recall, and F1 were among the measures used to conclude the assessment. On APP reviews for text sentiment analysis, the
outcomes are 87 %, 86 %, and 85.5 %, respectively.

2.7

Conclusion

Several research papers were examined in this part with reference to the application of
Machine Learning, deep learning, NLP, and other domains in the Sentiment Analysis
classification based on rankings. It also emphasizes the small amount of study that
has been done on classifying sentiment using various feature extraction methods and
techniques. Only a few authors have investigated the lack of implementation of feature
extraction techniques in limited cases. Objective 1 has been met in this section. The
methodology used in the technical report is depicted in the next section.

3

Sentiment Analysis Methodology and Design

The Knowledge Discovery in Databases (KDD)1 and CRISP DM2 techniques are used
in most data mining programs. The KDD approach, on the other hand, is used in
this research project. The general sequential flow of the project is shown below, which
depicts the phases involved in putting the study into action, from data collecting through
outcomes evaluation. Figure 1 depicts the KDD flow diagram for Sentiment Analysis.

Fig 1. KDD Process flow for Sentiment Analysis

3.1

Data Selection

THe dataset chosen for the research was available online, published by a renowed author
for research purposes 3 .From 1995 through 2015, a collection of comments and associated metadata were written on the Amazon.com marketplace. This is to make it easier
to research the qualities (and evolution) of customer reviews, which could include how
individuals evaluate and share their experiences with large-scale items. (Over 130 million
1

https://www.javatpoint.com/kdd-process-in-data-mining
https://www.datascience-pm.com/crisp-dm-2/
3
http://deepyeti.ucsd.edu/jianmo/amazon/index.html
2

9

customer reviews). The dataset is distributed in different categories of products available
on amazon and is accessible on request basis. The downloaded data however is a subcategory. Sub-category of ”All Beauty” products is used for this research project among
other categories. Both original data (3271,345 reviews) and meta data (32,992 products)
has been used in this project respectively.

3.2

Data Pre-processing and Transformation

Data Pre-Processing:
The data that was available for the project was in the json format. As a result, the initial
step in data pre-processing was to convert the json format to csv in order to use pandas to construct dataframes. To improve the findings, the original data and meta data
were blended to create a combination of columns. The data was in raw format, it was
necessary to clean it before applying Machine Learning models to it. Data pre-processing
has been implemented, including the removal of null values, renaming columns, removing
irrelevant or unnecessary columns, and converting to datetime format etc.
Data Transformation:
The data was ready for transformation after pre-processing. Text pre-processing is carried out in this step. A subset of ”perfumes” as a product is gathered for this project
from the numerous beauty items available. Using the ratings column, a rating class is
created to categorize the ratings as good or bad. As shown in Figure 2, the reviews were
rated on a scale of 1 to 5, with 1 being the lowest and 5 being the highest, based on the
number of reviews available online.

Fig 2. Distribution of Ratings against Number of reviews
Following that, several text pre-processing procedures such as the removal of stop
words, the removal of special characters, the conversion to lower case, the removal of
punctuation, and the removal of special characters has been implemented using libraries
such as Spacy, gensim, textBolb, nltk and more 4 . Detailed description is provided in
the respective implentation sections. To obtain clean text from the summary text, the
normalize and lemmaize methods are utilized. Further the data is split into train and
test with the ratio of 75(train):25(test).
4

https://www.infoworld.com/article/3519413/8-great-python-libraries-for-natural-languageprocessing.html

10

3.3

Data Mining

Feature extraction is conducted externally in traditional machine learning techniques.
Feature extractions were performed for the SVM, Logistic Regression and Naive Bayes in
this study, and various features were extracted. The Feature extraction technqiues used
are CountVector and TF-IDF.Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF) is
an Information Retrieval method that considers both Term Frequency (TF) and Inverse
Document Frequency (IDF). It reflects the prominence of a particular word in a group of
documents. The tf-idf value rises proportionally as the number of times a word appears
in a document. This extraction method gave good results in a research conducted by
(Haque et al.; 2018). Where as CountVector is used to convert a text into a vector based
on the frequency (count) of each word that appears throughout the text. Algorithms like
SVM, Naive Bayes and Logistic Regression provide better results with the implementation
of Feature extraction for Sentiment Analysis. Therefore, TF-IDF and CountVectorizer
feature extractors has been implemented for three Machine Learning models used for
classification of reviews.

3.4

Data Interpretation and Evaluation

The results derived from the models are presented and compared in section 6. A confusion matrix and a classification report are used to depict the algorithm’s outcomes.
For measuring model performance, the relevant F1 scores, accuracy, and precision are
computed and given in the implementation part of each of the algorithms. The major
elements of these evaluation matrices, as well as the formulas for calculating them, are
presented below.
Primary Components

Fig 3. Primary components measures used for the research
Evaluation metrices
• Accuracy: The ratio of total accurate/correct predictions to the total number of
instances/observations is termed as Accuracy.
Accuracy =

TP + TN
TP + FP + TN + FN

11

(1)

• Precision: The number of accurately predicted positive classes divided by the
total number of positive predictions generated by the model(correct and incorrect)
is known as Precision.
TP
(2)
P recision =
TP + FP

• Recall: The ratio of predicted positive instances to all the instances that belongs
to the positive class is Recall.
Recall =

TP
TP + FN

(3)

• F1-score: The harmonic average of precision and recall is calculated as F1-score.
F 1score = 2 ∗

P recision ∗ Recall
P recision + Recall

(4)

F1 score can be used as a good evaluation matrix because the dataset is not well balanced
and it is adequate to use as a evaluation metric in this case. All of the matrices listed
above, however, are computed for each model implemented.
The sentiment analysis classification methodology was developed in line with the requirements of the project. A subset is extracted from the entire dataset which contained
millions of customer reviews and the subset was considered for the final implementation.
The train and test data was split in the ratio of 75:25, 75% for training and 25% for
testing. In this research, the clean text retrieved and rating class is split into train and
test cases.

4

Design Specification

Figure 4 depicts the three-tier architecture utilized to implement this project, briefly
describing the procedures taken and the technologies and tools employed.

12

Fig.4 Sentiment Analysis Classification Design
TIER 3: Data Persistence Tier
The data is selected and gathered in this stage. The dataset used for this project was
available online. Among the data retrieved, a subset of data is selected to use in this
research. Later, the data gathered is fecthed to a jupyter notebook to create dataframes
in order to perform operations.
TIER 2: Business Logic Tier
In this tier, the procedure is followed sequentially. Firstly, the input files fetched in jupyter notebook was in json.gz format. The original data and the meta data file is merged to
carry out pre-processing. Pre-processing procedures are implemented such as discarding
irrelevant columns, dropping null vales, changing datetime object etc. The clean data
with NAs removed was then transformed. As the project’s aim is to analyse sentiments, a
clean text in terms of text pre-processing to apply classification algorithms was mandatory therefore, the transformation of data included text pre-processing such as removing
special characters, excluding stop words and more. All the text pre-processing has been
carried out using python libraries including nltk, spacy, gensim and re. A clean data was
generated and the application of feature extractors such as TF-IDF vectorizer and Count
Vectorizer is used for each ML classification algorithms. All the steps are conducted in
Jupyter Notebook.
TIER 1: Presentation Tier
The outcome generated in the previous stage is visualized in this stage. The visualizations are in the form of Classification Report, confusion matrix, bar plot, comparison
table etc and has been generated using python libraries such as matplotlib and seaborn.

13

5

Implementation of Sentiment Analysis Classification Models

5.1

Introduction

The implementation, evaluation and results of the models used for Sentiment Analysis
from the Amazon product reviews is discussed in this section. The primary focus of
the project is the text pre-processing since among all the data available, text is one of
the most unstructured form of data. The data was formed in a way the labels were
created in order to classify the sentiment as Good or Bad. In terms of modeling, the
review ratings were not distributed normally, the ratings were classified. Rating 1 and
2 have been classified as ’BAD’ and rating class from 3, 4 and 5 have been classified as
’GOOD’.The process of feature extraction and the methods used is also discussed in the
section. For evaluating the performance of the models implemented, Confusion matrix
and Classification reports are plotted 5 . F1 score, precision, recall and accuracy are used
to determine the performance of machine learning models for each models. A comparison
of developed models with feature extractors is carried out additionally, a comparison of
both developed models and the existing models is also presented. Out of all the models,
the model with best performance is selected.

5.2

Machine Learning Models

5.2.1

Support Vector Machine

Sentiment Analysis is a natural language processing technique that analyzes text to
identify if the author’s intents toward a given topic, product, or other entity are positive or negative. SVM is a supervised(feed-me) machine learning technique that may be
applied to classification and regression problems. SVM conducts classification by locating
the hyper-plane that separates the n-dimensional classes we generated.The scikit learn
library’s SVC function was used to implement this approach. Traditional approaches,
such as SVM, do not necessitate a separate validation set, hence all of the data was saved
in the same dataframe. The binary classification for reviews in terms of ratings were
encoded as follows: [0: ”bad”, 1: ”good”]
5.2.2

Naive Bayes

One of two famous naive Bayes variations used in sentiment analysis is Naive Bayes, which
executes the naive Bayes algorithm for multinomial distributed data. This technique is
a variant of the well-known naive Bayes algorithm, which is designed for predicting and
classifying tasks with more than two classes. The same process as SVM is followed for
Naive Bayes model. The scikit learn library’ MultinomialNB function was used to
implement this approach.
5.2.3

Logistic Regression

Logistic regression is a linear model used for classification. Other name for logistic regression are maximum entropy classification, logit regression or sometimes log-linear classifier.
A logistic function is used to model the probability of the probable outputs of a single
5

https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.metrics.classification report.html

14

trial. Again as SVM and Naive Bayes is followed for logistic regression as the functions
of train and test are globally defined. The scikit learn library’ LogisticRegression
function was used to implement this approach.

5.3

Feature Extraction

For conventional Machine Learning models like SVM, Naive Bayes and Logistic Regression feature extraction is a mandatory task to achieve better results, unlike deep learning
algorithms. Therefore, in this research two feature extractors are used namely, CountVectorizer and TF-IDF are used for each models to determine the performance separately.
The goal of the CountVectorizer approach is to transform textual data into vectors, with
each document resulting in a vector that indicates the frequency of all unique words
found in the documentation vector space for that particular document. The TF-IDF
score (Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency) was added to our CountVectorizer
(BoW) model to help us focus on more important words. TF-IDF weights words based on
how uncommon they are in our dataset, ignoring terms that are overused and contribute
to the noise. A comparison of performance of both the feature extractors along with ML
models is presented below.

6

Evaluation and Results

As discussed in previous section, the evaluation of the model is carried out using different
matrices such as Precision, recall, f1-score and accuracy. A total of over 16k reviews were
considered for this implementation with a train test split of 75:25. 75% train set and
25% test set making it 12175 and 4059 for train and test sets, respectively. For all the
experiments the same training set and test set was used.

6.1

EXPERIMENT 1: Classification models with CountVector.

6.1.1

SVM

Fig. 5 Classification report of SVM using CountVectorizer
With the help of a classification report and confusion matrix, the performance of the
model was evaluated. As depicted in figure 6, the classification report shows the overall
accuracy of 0.89 provided by SVM using CountVectorizer. The precision, recall and f1
score are 0.84, 0.55 and 0.67 respectively. The accuracy of the model depicts how well
our model performed. In this case, the SVM performed well.

15

Fig.6. SVM Confusion Matrix with CountVectorizer
The confusion matrix in figure 6 depicts the True label against the predicted label. The
SVM model correctly predicted 518 as bad reviews (TP) and 3166 as good reviews(TN).
The reviews wrongly predicted as good reviews but are actually bad is 63.

6.1.2

Naive Bayes

Fig. 9. Classification report of Naive Bayes using Count Vector
As depicted in figure 6, the classification report shows the overall accuracy of 0.89 provided
by Naive Bayes using CountVector. The precision, recall and f1 score are 0.84, 0.55 and
0.67 respectively. 89% of the overall is predicted by the model.

Fig. 10. Confusion Matrix of Naive Bayes using Count Vector
The confusion matrix in figure 8 depicts the True label against the predicted label. The
Naive Bayes model correctly predicted 459 as bad reviews (TP) and 3139 as good re16

views(TN). The reviews wrongly predicted as good reviews but are actually bad is 90. In
comparison with Naive Bayes using TF-IDF, Count Vector predicted nearly better.
6.1.3

Logistic Regression

Fig. 11. Classification report of Logistic Regression using Count Vector
As depicted in figure 6, the classification report shows the overall accuracy of 0.90 provided
by Logistic Regression using CountVector. The precision, recall and f1 score are 0.72,
0.87 and 0.79 respectively. 90% of the overall is predicted by the model.

Fig. 12. Confusion Matrix of Logistic Regression using Count Vector
The confusion matrix in figure 8 depicts the True label against the predicted label. The
Naive Bayes model correctly predicted 721 as bad reviews (TP) and 2951 as good reviews(TN). The reviews wrongly predicted as good reviews but are actually bad is 109.
In comparison with Logistic Regression using TF-IDF, Count Vector predicted gave better results in terms of accuracy, precision, recall and f1 score.

6.2

EXPERIMENT 2: Classification models with TF-IDF.

6.2.1

SVM

Fig. 7. Classification report of SVM using TF-IDF

17

As depicted in figure 6, the classification report shows the overall accuracy of 0.91 provided
by SVM using TF-IDF. The precision, recall and f1 score are 0.90, 0.64 and 0.75 respectively. The accuracy of the model depicts how well our model performed. In this case, the
SVM performed better with TF-IDF vector as compared to Count Vector.

Fig.8. SVM Confusion Matrix with TF-IDF
The confusion matrix in figure 8 depicts the True label against the predicted label. The
SVM model correctly predicted 532 as bad reviews (TP) and 3173 as good reviews(TN).
The reviews wrongly predicted as good reviews but are actually bad is 56. In comparison
with SVM using Count Vector, TF-IDF predicted nearly better.
6.2.2

Naive Bayes

Fig. 7. Classification report of Naive Bayes using TF-IDF
As depicted in figure 6, the classification report shows the overall accuracy of 0.80 provided
by Naive Bayes using TF-IDF.The accuracy of the model depicts how well our model performed. In this case, the Naive Bayes performed better with Count Vector as compared
to TF-IDF.

18

Fig.8. Naive Bayes Confusion Matrix with TF-IDF
The confusion matrix in figure 8 depicts the True label against the predicted label. The
Naive Bayes model correctly predicted 21 as bad reviews (TP) and 3229 as good reviews(TN). The reviews wrongly predicted as good reviews but are actually bad is 0. In
comparison with Naive Bayes using TF-IDF, Count Vector predicted nearly better.
6.2.3

Logistic Regression

Fig. 7. Classification report of Logistic Regression using TF-IDF
As depicted in figure 6, the classification report shows the overall accuracy of 0.89 provided
by Logistic Regression using TF-IDF. The precision, recall and f1 score are 0.67, 0.87 and
0.76 respectively. The accuracy of the model depicts how well our model performed. In
this case, the Logistic Regression performed better with Count Vector as compared to
TF-IDF .

Fig.8. Logistic Regression Confusion Matrix with TF-IDF
19

The confusion matrix in figure 8 depicts the True label against the predicted label. The
Logistic model correctly predicted 722 as bad reviews (TP) and 2871 as good reviews(TN).
The reviews wrongly predicted as good reviews but are actually bad is 358. In comparison
with Logistic Regression using TF-IDF, Count Vector predicted nearly better with a slight
difference.

6.3

Conclusion

Section 5 and Section 6 fully answers the research question mentioned in section 1.2.1.
The performance of the models were good as these models have proved to be working
efficient by many researchers for these problems of classification. In this research project,
SVM model with TF-IDF feature extractor performed well and produced best results
among all the other models. Therefore, for classification task SVM is the model selected.

6.4

Comparison of Implemented models

In table below, the performance comparison of the models implemented for the project
namely, SVM, Naive Bayes and Logistic Regression is depicted with training set (75%)
and testing set(25%) i.e. 12175 and 4059 for train and test sets.

The comparison between the models implemented for Sentiment classification

7

Discussion

The primary objective of the project was to perform sentiment analysis by building models
that provide accurate and efficient outcome. After a thorough literature review, a basic
understanding of current limitations and gaps were discovered. Most of the researchers
developed either a lexicon-based model for classification or used labelled data to apply
Machine Learning algorithms. A hybrid of Lexicon and ML based models was the area less
explored. In this research project, two feature extraction techniques namely CountVector
and TF-IDF were used to perform classification using SVM, Naive Bayes and Logistic
Regression. The best results among all were obtained by Support Vector Machine(SVM)
with the overall accuracy of 91%. The precision, recall and f1-score for the same was 0.90,
0.64 and 0.75 respectively. The scope of the project included building the best suited
classification model for Sentiment Analysis using Amazon product reviews by extracting
features. In terms of performance, all the classification models performed reasonably well.
From large dataset, a subset is used and pre-processing is carried out. Additionally, text
pre-processing is implemented as the data available was in textual format and in order
to apply machine learning models it was converted to numeric form for classification. A

20

comparison of various approaches is provided in this research. It also highlights the poor
and in-effective performance of conventional classification approaches.

8

Conclusion and Future Work

Given the significance of customer happiness these days, it’s critical to concentrate on
upgrading existing systems to make them more user-friendly and time-saving. Sentiment
Analysis has been shown to be quite effective for customers and businesses in several
studies and techniques. From this experiment conducted, the best classifier was able to
classify the ratings with 91 percent accuracy. The model performed reasonably well as
compared to the existed models.
Although the objectives achieved by the research was a success, in course of development it was not limited and faced some problems. The major problem included the
unstructured textual format unlabelled data. It was a tedious task to transform the
data. Also the classification models as the name suggests were trained on binary class of
ratings. A subset was used in order to implement models but the scope could have been
expanded to explore more subsets. One of reasons for using a small subset was to reduce
the computational time required for training. Two types of feature extraction techniques
were used, although there are plenty of other techniques that could be used to generate
better outcomes.
Sentiment Analysis from product reviews is a difficult and tedious task as there are
numerous parameters to account for and it may vary from small subset to large set of data.
The classification machine learning techniques provided notable results and improvement
was observed with the implemented hybrid technique. In conclusion, with a small subset
of data with limited text pre-processing and feature extraction techniques the models
performed well.The dataset used for the implementation of this project was not labelled
and was prone to lot of noise. It is a good idea to expand the scope by exploring more
techniques and methods on large datasets by using multiple subset or categories.
In future, a larger dataset should be used and more text pre-processing techniques
can be implemented to achieve better results. It would be interesting to see the models
performance on labelled dataset in huge expansion. A large dataset may lead to superior
outcomes. Deep learning techniques can also be implemented with the scope same as this
project, the results derived from this would also be interesting. Additionally, application
of a Recommender System using either user-based or item-based collaborative filtering is
also a potential idea.

9

Acknowledgement

My sincere gratitude to our college, National College of Ireland, and the MSc in Data
Analytics department for enabling me to complete this research project effectively over
the last three months. My supervisor and mentor, Prof. Christian Horn, for his assistance
throughout the project. His constant support made it possible for me to finish and submit
this thesis. I value his time and, in particular, his thoughtful observations. I consider
him as a great mentor. Finally, I’d want to thank my friends and family back home for
their constant support and encouragement during this study process.

21

References
Ahmad, M., Aftab, S., Ali, I. and Hameed, N. (2017). Hybrid tools and techniques for
sentiment analysis: a review, Int. J. Multidiscip. Sci. Eng 8(3): 29–33.
Fan, X., Li, X., Du, F., Li, X. and Wei, M. (2016). Apply word vectors for sentiment
analysis of app reviews, 2016 3rd International Conference on Systems and Informatics
(ICSAI), IEEE, pp. 1062–1066.
Gamal, D., Alfonse, M., M El-Horbaty, E.-S. and M Salem, A.-B. (2019). Analysis of
machine learning algorithms for opinion mining in different domains, Machine Learning
and Knowledge Extraction 1(1): 224–234.
Gupta, M., Mishra, A., Manral, G. and Ansari, G. (2020). Aspect-category based sentiment analysis on dynamic reviews, 2020 IEEE 5th International Conference on Computing Communication and Automation (ICCCA), IEEE, pp. 492–496.
Haque, T. U., Saber, N. N. and Shah, F. M. (2018). Sentiment analysis on large scale
amazon product reviews, 2018 IEEE international conference on innovative research
and development (ICIRD), IEEE, pp. 1–6.
Hermansyah, R. and Sarno, R. (2020). Sentiment analysis about product and service
evaluation of pt telekomunikasi indonesia tbk from tweets using textblob, naive bayes &
k-nn method, 2020 International Seminar on Application for Technology of Information
and Communication (iSemantic), IEEE, pp. 511–516.
Jabbar, J., Urooj, I., JunSheng, W. and Azeem, N. (2019). Real-time sentiment analysis
on e-commerce application, 2019 IEEE 16th International Conference on Networking,
Sensing and Control (ICNSC), IEEE, pp. 391–396.
Jha, B. K., Sivasankari, G. and Venugopal, K. (2021). Sentiment analysis for e-commerce
products using natural language processing, Annals of the Romanian Society for Cell
Biology pp. 166–175.
Khanvilkar, G. and Vora, D. (2019). Smart recommendation system based on product
reviews using random forest, 2019 International Conference on Nascent Technologies
in Engineering (ICNTE), IEEE, pp. 1–9.
Maas, A., Daly, R. E., Pham, P. T., Huang, D., Ng, A. Y. and Potts, C. (2011). Learning
word vectors for sentiment analysis, Proceedings of the 49th annual meeting of the
association for computational linguistics: Human language technologies, pp. 142–150.
May, J., Mokgalaka, A. L., Murali, Kumar, M., Haas, E. and Simran (2020). Machine
learning (ml) for natural language processing (nlp).
URL: www.lexalytics.com/lexablog/machine-learning-natural-language-processing
Prabha, M. I. and Srikanth, G. U. (2019). Survey of sentiment analysis using deep
learning techniques, 2019 1st International Conference on Innovations in Information
and Communication Technology (ICIICT), IEEE, pp. 1–9.
Rajeev, P. V. and Rekha, V. S. (2015). Recommending products to customers using
opinion mining of online product reviews and features, 2015 International Conference
on Circuits, Power and Computing Technologies [ICCPCT-2015], IEEE, pp. 1–5.
22

Rajeswari, A., Mahalakshmi, M., Nithyashree, R. and Nalini, G. (2020). Sentiment analysis for predicting customer reviews using a hybrid approach, 2020 Advanced Computing and Communication Technologies for High Performance Applications (ACCTHPA),
IEEE, pp. 200–205.
Seetharamulu, B., Reddy, B. N. K. and Naidu, K. B. (2020). Deep learning for sentiment
analysis based on customer reviews, 2020 11th International Conference on Computing,
Communication and Networking Technologies (ICCCNT), IEEE, pp. 1–5.
Sharma, Y., Agrawal, G., Jain, P. and Kumar, T. (2017). Vector representation of
words for sentiment analysis using glove, 2017 international conference on intelligent
communication and computational techniques (icct), IEEE, pp. 279–284.
Shivaprasad, T. and Shetty, J. (2017). Sentiment analysis of product reviews: a review, 2017 International Conference on Inventive Communication and Computational
Technologies (ICICCT), IEEE, pp. 298–301.
Singh, S. N. and Sarraf, T. (2020). Sentiment analysis of a product based on user reviews using random forests algorithm, 2020 10th International Conference on Cloud
Computing, Data Science & Engineering (Confluence), IEEE, pp. 112–116.
Solangi, Y. A., Solangi, Z. A., Aarain, S., Abro, A., Mallah, G. A. and Shah, A. (2018).
Review on natural language processing (nlp) and its toolkits for opinion mining and
sentiment analysis, 2018 IEEE 5th International Conference on Engineering Technologies and Applied Sciences (ICETAS), IEEE, pp. 1–4.
Yang, J. and Yang, J. (2020). Aspect based sentiment analysis with self-attention and
gated convolutional networks, 2020 IEEE 11th International Conference on Software
Engineering and Service Science (ICSESS), IEEE, pp. 146–149.
Zhang, L., Wang, S. and Liu, B. (2018). Deep learning for sentiment analysis: A survey,
Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 8(4): e1253.

23

